## Testing

Functional Testing
 : Focused on input/output behaviour of method. Test if function returns correct known output for certain input. Include corner cases.

Structural Testing
 : Look at source code to determine test cases that cover most of it.

Automatic Test Case Generation
 : Automatically generate test cases for every possible path the program can take.

Static Program Analysis
 : Compute all possible program executions and use mathematical reasoning.

## Requirement Elicitation

### Requirements

Describe the **users view**, the *what*, not the how.

Functional:

- Functionality: in$\to$out mapping, abnormal situation handling, validity checks
- External interfaces (GUI, ICP, interfaces, hardware communication): Valid range/accuracy/tolerance check, units of measure, screen/data/command formats, description of purpose.

Nonfunctional:

- Performance: Scale, number of * supported, number of transactions processed per second
- Attributes: portability, correctness, etc.
- Design constraints: Required standards, tools, languages, administration of system, licensing, certification, regulation, (**technology and methodology should not be constrained by the client**)

#### Quality Criteria for Requirements (when writing them down)

Correctness, Completeness, Consistency (no contradictions), Claity (Un-ambiguity), Realism, Verifiability (when tests pass, requirements met), Traceability (every feature can be traced back to a set of functional requirement)

#### Examples

Bad|  Better
----| -------
Shall be usable by elderly people|Letters at least 1cm high
Real-time response|Less than 2s response time

**The sooner a defect is found, the cheaper it is to fix**


