# Scheduling and Synchronization (OSPP Section 5, without IPC)

## Reminder

Disabling interrupts: Simple, can't be rescheduled inside critical section, doesn't work with multiple processors.

(Test-and-Set/)Compare-and-Swap:
```C
word cas(word *flag, word oldval, word newval) {
	atomically {
		if (*flag == oldval) {
			*flag = newval;
			return oldval;
		} else {
			return *flag;
		}
	}
}
```

Load-Link, Store-Conditional:
- LL: Lead and mark as owned
- SC: Atomically: Store if already marked by this processor, clear marks by other processors, return whether it worked.

Spinning: 
- Uniprocessor: No point
- Multiprocessor: Can't spin forever, blocking thread/rescheduling is expensive.

Competitive spinning: Spin for as long as it takes to context switch, within factor of 2 of optimal solution.

## Priority Inversion



## Priority Inheritance

## Techniques

### Asynchronous (buffered) IPC

Receiver blocks until received, sender doesn't (obviously).

### Synchronous (unbuffered) IPC

Receiver doesn't block, sender does, waits for receiver to be ready.

### Duality of Messages and Shared-Memory

Difference is performance, which depends on the hardware.

### Unix Pipes

Unidirectional, buffered channel between two processes. Create: `inf pipe(int pipefd[2])`{.c}, then fork $\to$ one `pipefd` from parent to child, and one from child to parent. Named: Create with `mkfifo f`, `echo hi > f` in one terminal, `cat f` in another to send messages.

### Unix Signals

Asynchronous notification in kernel, receiver doesn't wait. Interrupt process and kill/freeze/etc.
