## Pseudorandom Functions

Alice encrypts message $\in \{0, 1\}^n$ with a bijective permutation function $F : \{0, 1\}^n \to \{0, 1\}^n$ unknown to the attacker, Bob can decrypt it with the inverse $F^{-1}$.

A truly random representation of this function would take ${m * 2^m}$ space, so instead we use a key to generate a pseudo-random permutation (keyed permutation) $F : \{0, 1\}^* \times \{0, 1\}^* \to\{0, 1\}^*$, we write $F_k(m) = F(k, m)$.

### Security

- Scenario 0: Attacker can get encrypted message from an oracle that chooses a key for a pseudo-random permutation.
- Scenario 1: Attacker can get encrypted message from an oracle that chooses a truly random permutation.

If he cannot distinguish between these and the equivalent inverses, the pseudo-random function can be considered secure.

Block ciphers are about the same as pseudo-random permutations. 

We always encrypt/decrypt one block at a time.

### Naive method

Generate random $r_1, r_2, \dots$

Ciphertext = $(r_1, F_K(r_1) \oplus m_1), (r_2, F_K(r_2) \oplus m_2), \dots$

Is expensive, because lots of randomness needed


### Popular Block Ciphers

| name | key length | block length |
|------|------------|--------------|
|DES|56|64|
|IDEA|128|64|
|AES|128/192/256|128|


### Modes of Operation

#### Electronic Codebook (EC)

Ciphertext is just $F$ applied to every block of the message, same for inverse.

| Positive | Negative |
| ------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------|
|Error in block $c_i$ only affects this block|Same input has always same output|
|Parallelizable||

#### Cipher-Block Chaining (CBC)

1. Random initialization vector $v_i$
2. $c_0 = F_K(v_i\oplus m_0)$
3. $c_1 = F_K(c_0\oplus m_1)$ ...

Considered secure.

| Positive | Negative |
| ------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- |
|Only the following block is affected on error|Not parallelizable encryption|
|decryption parallelizable|One bit of message changes -> recompute everything|

### OFB

By using an initial random $v_i$ and feeding the output of $F$ to itself, a pseudorandom generator can be produced, which can then be used to XOR the plaintext. $G(k) = F_k(v_i), F_k(F_k(v_i)), \dots$.

Is \textsc{IND-CPA} secure.

| Positive | Negative |
| ----------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| Error in block $c_i$ doesn't propagate | Cannot be parallized (but precompute stream) |
| One bit of message changes -> only one block update | |

### CTR

By using an increasing counter starting at a random $v_i$ as input to $F$, a stream can be produced to use for XOR-encryption.

$v_i$ could repeat.

| Positive | Negative |
| ---------------------------| ----------------------------------------|
| Error only affects block | |
| Parallelizable | |
| One bit changes -> No need to recompute everything | |

### Padding

Append $1\leq x \leq b$ bytes with value $x$. To decrypt: Read last byte, discard that many bytes.

|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|8|
|0F|1A|55|88|04|04|04|04|

[CBC Cipher Text Stealing (Link)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ciphertext_stealing#CBC_ciphertext_stealing_encryption_using_a_standard_CBC_interface)

### In Practice

Use key of $K$ bits to specify random subset of $2^K$ mappings, near ideal.

Shannon's

- Diffusion: 1 bit plaintext change $\to$ ciphertext bits should change with $p=\frac{1}{2}$.
- Confusion: 1 bit key change $\to$ every ciphertext bit changes.

#### Diffusion Paradigm

Mix output by reordering multiple times(rounds) along with confusion by combining multiple PRPs.

#### Product Ciphers

Increase security of PPRs by iteration using multiple keys. Even better when $F_K$ not idempotent (apply twice yields same).

#### Substitution-Permutation Networks

One round consists of substitution (using [S-boxes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S-box)), permutation. Design can be tricky. S-boxes can be inverted, but on 1 bit input change at least 2 bits of the output change, *Avalanche Effect*. Permutation designed so that output of a single S-box is spread to different S-boxes next round.

### Data Encryption Standard (DES)
